---
category: "The Story So Far"
page_title: "The Story So Far - Chapter 1"
layout: "paper3"
title: "Chapter 1: The Seeds of Becoming"
author: "Silas N. Schlax"
opening: "Dear Fellow Traveler,"
closing: "Until Next Time,"
date_sub: "April 17, 2025"
next_page: "/the-story-so-far/chapter-2"
previous_page: "/the-story-so-far/preface"
---

As many of you know, I started attending Heritage Leadership Academy in sixth grade, against my will as my younger self would have said. Regardless of what you may be thinking, my parents forcing me to attend a more traditional school over pure homeschooling, was one of the single most influential things in my life. While Heritage was not ideal in many aspects, it was a wide open door leading to many possibilities, it gave me the stepping stones to later pressure Bonum, Verum, et Pulchrum—The Good, the True, and the Beautiful. That aside, Heritage took me from opposing schooling, to thoroughly enjoying it, from hating to write a short paragraph, to writing multipage essays. But it also gave me competitiveness, on one hand this was extremely helpful, making me give my all in everything I did. On the other hand, it hindered my ability to make lasting and meaningful friendships, but this further helped the development of my character. To give you a better picture of how impactful Heritage was, I am going to give a somewhat brief outline of each year in some detail.

Let us start at the beginning, sixth grade. I have not wanted to get out of something more than I wanted to get out of going to Heritage, that is, till I finished my first day. While I do not remember much of sixth grade, I know two things for sure. First, my view on education had changed, and my love for learning with it, which in return change my life forever. And second, that I will forever be bad at grammar and spelling. Sadly, I only remember small snipped of this year, that are not worth sharing here.

Seventh grade, and the first wave of truly influential teachers. In seventh grade I got some new teachers, while I must say each and every one of my teachers were influential in some way, I had two teachers who were particularly influential. First, Mrs. Murrell, my ELA—English Language Arts—teacher, while I will admit I absolutely hated that class when I was taking it, what I learned without even knowing it gave me a strong foundation for me to build upon in high school. The reason I hated this class, was because there was just a ton of writing and reading, two things I was not very good at. That said, by writing day in and day out, I learned how to write well, and fast, without even thinking. Although my handwriting got worse, my writing got better and better over the two years I had her as a teacher. Mrs. Murrell's classes, would eventually lead me to my love of writing, which hopefully is evident by this—dare I say—masterpiece. Second, Dr. Soderberg, my History, Logic, and Leadership teacher, Dr. Soderberg while strict, was gracious. He made the most boring of topics fun and engaging. From having a debate on Santa, or iPhone vs. Apple in logic class, to doing a history project that included food, Dr. Soderberg made sure that we learned and remembered. He had a different style of teaching than all my other teachers, but it was exactly what I needed to learn, how to learn, and I thank him for it. 

Eight grade, this year, was sadly less influential as Dr. Soderberg left. But I still learned a great deal, one of my favorite classes was Leadership with Mr. Claggett. I could not tell you what about his class I enjoyed, but his overall teaching style, and ethos was appealing. Second, Mrs. Murrell once again in English Language Arts, and World History. One thing that made this year particularly memorable, is that this was the peak of Covid-19, and for the first eight weeks of school I attended online via zoom. This was challenging because for three days a week I spent a total time of around five to six hours on zoom for all my classes. One memorable incident, was the times I was “forgotten about”, I had a teacher mute the audio, then face me at the ceiling for about twenty minutes. All that said, overall it was an insightful year preparing me for my transition to a very different form of education. Heritage was not the beginning of my education it was the foundation, or cornerstone of my education, without it, my high-school training would be like the house built on the sand, blown down with the first storm.
