---
category: "Speeches"
page_title: "Modern Computer Technology"
layout: "paper"
title: "Modern Computer Technology Should be Taught in Schools"
student: "Schlax, Silas"
class: "<a target='_blank' href='https://kepler.education/courses/248cdd2a-4e6c-46a3-939c-454f4416c089'>Rhetoric: Fitting Words</a>, 8:00 am EST"
instructor: "Dr. Gregory Soderberg, Instructor"
date_sub: "November 16, 2023"
file: "../../assets/files/pdf/schlax_silas_mordern_computer_technology_should_be_taught_in_schools_Rhetoric.pdf"
---

1945, the year that marks the beginning of the technological revolution of the modern era. We termed the very first computer the E.N.I.A.C., and it filled an entire room. Just try to imagine that! Over the following 28 years, development on the computer continued till they produced the Micral N, or the first “personal computer”. At their debut, computers didn’t get much attention, that is till the first Mac made its debut in 1984. Development of the Computer and eventually the “cell phone” continued and year after year got better and better. Computers were originally meant for calculations, but now serve many purposes. Today you can hardly turn the corner without seeing something run by a computer, whether a stoplight, or a fridge, or your robot vacuum. So then; All high-school students should have some basic training on computers, and other modern technology; if and only if we do it for the benefit of humanity, not for its demise.


First, let’s get some definitions straight. Computers are devices that use electricity and the binary system to process data. Modern technology is anything that is partly operated by a computer like a newer car, or a robot. A dead-end job is any job that most people can complete with little to no skill, such as fast food, trash collection, and more. Blue-collar jobs are jobs of trade like carpentry, plumbing, electrical, and more.


I agree that we don’t “need” modern technology or computers in everyday life; we have survived thousands of years without them. In the modern era, it’s everywhere and we can’t exterminate it naturally. Therefore, we should teach older students to use it responsibly for the benefit of humanity, rather than its destruction.

My argument will consist of these 4 points. First, I will discuss how computers can prevent scams, internet dangers, and privacy protection. Then I will argue that knowing how to use modern technology will help you in the modern workplace. Third, I will point out that without a change eventually, those who don’t know how to use technology properly will “fall behind” and get stuck in dead-end jobs. Finally, I will argue that there is a change we need to implement to stop the effects of dehumanization to benefit humanity.

Computers…their capabilities are virtually limitless, used for good, and for evil. Computers, when used right, can be spectacular in their performances and beauty. Think back to the last time you and your family turned the lights out, made some popcorn, and watched a family favorite movie. Sitting there among your family, seeing the pictures go by, and hearing the music or voices of people. It’s a spectacular performance, you could even call it beautiful. For instance, in the past 20-30 years, we have advanced computer technology so much that we can do almost anything we want. As Stan Lee said in his spiderman comics, “with great power comes great responsibility” Any tool that grants one individual power over another will inevitably be utilized for great evils. Yet we still use the internet daily, which in return means that everything we do is being watched. We often give our data like email, phone number, banking information, and more, to websites all over. And with the ever-present evil lurking around looking for easy prey to feed upon, we need to take steps to ensure our safety and privacy. The best and most effective way to do this is to educate everyone about these things. Think of the older generation, which is constantly targeted for scams as they are more easily convinced of the lie and most often end up giving away their life savings. If this generation were to have grown up in a time where they taught these things, do you think scamming would be so profitable? What about older students who innocently click on a website for research but end up getting web-hocked, giving the hacker full access to their computer and information? Here I make the case that by teaching students–especially those in high school and even middle school–the dangers of the internet, and its dehumanizing tendencies, they will be less susceptible to things such as hacking, scamming, and more.

The modern workplace is a whole different world than it was 30 years ago. Computers and machines have replaced simple jobs that just 30 years ago were operated by humans. Almost all jobs nowadays use some sort of computer or machine to operate, a few examples are; the mail service, which uses machines to read, sort, and organize letters and packages. Fast food uses computers to input customer orders and construction workers, use large and small machines to do what needs to get done. To know about is not the ability to use, but the ability to use is to know about. To know about computers does not mean you can use them, but to use them means you know about them. People should know how to use computers, not only know about them.

Today is an age of social confusion, injustice, and a heap of other problems, full of power-hungry, savage, greedy, and careless politicians. Above all, it’s an age of human advancement in technology. Every day we make some advancement, at this rate, it won’t be long before robots are driving our buses, planes, and cars, humanity will progress and nothing natural can stop it. Those who don’t know how to use technology even in its simplest forms will end up in dead-end jobs or eventually jobless as machines replace them. We must teach students how to use computers, in a way that pushes them to truth and beauty, and not lies and destruction.

Today, technologies such as social media, entertainment, and advertisements are everywhere, and these things without change will dehumanize us all. What I mean by “dehumanizing,” is it will slowly degrade our moral standards and social justice, making humans seem like animals. Computers are useful and can be used for great good, but humans with twisted ideas of the truth have turned things like social media and movies into something that influences the youth into their ideas of “political correctness” and “individualism”‌. If we don’t take action to change and teach those who have the power to change our society–the youth today–we will end up like the Romans before its fall in 476 A.D. lazy and corrupt.

Computers are advancing quickly and skills such as critical thinking, verbal communication, and leadership are always more needed than computer literacy. But that does not mean you shouldn’t learn these skills to add to your proverbial toolbox. The more tools you have at your disposal, the better a job you can do in any situation.

Computers will never replace many jobs, and many jobs do not require much computer technology, such as blue-collar jobs and some parts of education. While this is true, even blue-collar jobs do use computers nowadays with things like scheduling apps, phones, management systems, and more. I will repeat my previous argument, that skills are something to learn and use. The more you have, the better you will perform at a given task.

We shouldn’t be focusing on computers and replacing humans with them, as it takes away from human productivity as poverty levels rise. Ever since the Industrial Revolution, humans have made automation a thing of utmost importance, and for somewhat good reason. Some jobs are just too dangerous for humans to do, like mining, operating large machines, and more. Machines are more suitable for certain jobs, but humans should still do some jobs like typing, driving, and secretarial work.

Computers are a magnificent gift we have, but without action, it will be the downfall of humanity. Teaching youth to use it properly and for the good of humanity, rather than what we do now with social media, is something we must do. Without a change, the world we know today will soon transform into something unrecognizable.


---