---
category: "Speeches"
page_title: "Plunder: A Pirates Life"
layout: "paper"
title: "How to Play Plunder; <i>A Pirate's Life</i>"
student: "Schlax, Silas"
class: "<a target='_blank' href='https://kepler.education/courses/28ca2a85-a1e4-489b-ad9b-e17592c84137'>Speech and Debate</a>, 1:30 pm EST"
instructor: "Dr. Karla Memmott, Instructor"
date_sub: "October 17, 2024"
file: "../../assets/files/pdf/schlax_silas_how_to_play_plunder_a_pirates_life_speech_and_debate.pdf"
---

Have you ever wanted to sail the 7 seas plundering and pillaging where ever you go, like the great Jack Sparrow–copyright Disney Pictures. What about bribing, threatening, or attacking fellow pirates? Or maybe ravaging the costs of islands to exploit them for gains! Today you will learn just how to do that, only in a game, not in real life! Thus, I present Plunder; <i>A Pirate’s Life</i>!

Plunder is a pirate themed strategy game that implements aspects of games such as Settlers of Catan, Risk, and Scythe–Another one of my favorite games. First, we need to set up the board. The board is created with 6 double-sided tiles with a grid of six-by-six. Shuffle these tiles and place them at random inside the outline to create a new and fresh board. To the side of the board you will place the resource cards–Rum, Iron, Wood, and Gold, separate 10 of each and place face up off to the side, then shuffle the rest and place face down. Next to these cards, you will place the Plunder Point and the Treasure Cards shuffled. Finally, place the two compass spinners, X-Marks-The-Spot tokens, the three dice, and the Storm piece near the board. Finally, give all the players their three ships, six flags, and reference cards respectively. 

Next, spin the two compasses to determine the placement of the X-tokens, follow the numbers and letters to find the placement on the board. Note that you can not place X-tokens on a tile that is not accessible by ship, as x tokens can only be claimed when the ship is adjacent to the island or on top of it if in the ocean. Another note is for a 3-4 player game use three x-tokens. For a 5-6 player game, use four x-tokens. Then do the same for the storm except use the center of the 3x3 to determine the placement, being partially off the board, is allowed. Determine the first player by rolling a die, the highest roller goes first, and picks which one skull island they want placing a flag on the island and a ship with three live in the port, then proceed counter-clockwise until all players have placed a ship and flag. Finally, each player picks three resource cards from the face-down deck. Note that play will continue clockwise, starting with the person who placed their ship and flag last.

Before I go onto turns, I need to show you your objective and how to win. Your objective to be the first player to reach ten Plunder Points. You can gain Plunder Points by gaining Plunder Point cards or having a ship active on the board, or a captured island, which each count as one Plunder Point. You can gain Plunder Point cards by destroying an enemy ship–unless stated otherwise–gaining them from Treasure cards, or buying one for five gold.
Good, now you are set to start, now we can move on to the fun stuff! Before you do anything else, you will pick up one resource card from the face-down deck per capture island you have that is valid—more on this later. After that, you will roll the movement die, after which you can do one or more of the following actions in any order:
Move
- Attack an island or enemy ship
- Conduct a trade
- Hunt for treasure
- Upgrade your ship
- End your turn, passing the die to the next player

First moving, you can move your ships in any order, and even split your roll up between different ships! But there are a few rules to movement. First, you cannot move diagonally, through islands or other ships, or more spaces than the die and masts indicate. For every mast you have on a ship, you gain one extra space that the ship can move, for instance if you roll a two you and have one mast that ship can move three spaces instead of two. Now, if you want to move into or out of the storm, you must pay two resource cards from your hand. Note that if you enter and exit in a single turn, that would cost four resource cards, as a side note if all the ports of an island are inside the storm that island become invalid and no longer gains you resources each turn... Also, if you roll a one, the storm is moved using the compass spinners to relocate it before you start moving.

What about trading and upgrading? First trading, unlike in Catan, you can not always trade with the bank, you have to be in a merchant port which there are only 4 of. When in this type of port, you can trade two-to-one for any resource in the bank. Now you can trade with other players too, but only if you are in a merchant port, if someone else is in a merchant port, if you are next to their ship, if you are in their port, or they are in your port. Remember that you can only trade on your turn. Now what about those fancy upgrades? Well, it's quite simple, refer to your reference guild to see the materials needed to buy that item, then if you have the materials place them in the bank and take what you bought and place it on one of your ships, on the board, or next to you, respectively. Note that cannons and masts do not take effect until your next turn. When placing ships, you must place them in a port that you own, or next to one of your ships.

Next, treasure cards!!! Treasure cards can either give great rewards or great penalties. You get them by moving to a tile with an X on it, or on the adjoining tile if on an island. When you claim an X-token, you first remove the token from the board, then pick the top Treasure card from the deck. You must complete as much as you can in order to get the rewards, example if the card asks you to lose three gold, to gain a life, but you only have two gold, you must give up the two gold to gain the life. Finally, once you have fulfilled the card, spin the compasses to place it on the board again. Note that it can be placed on the same tile as it was or on another tile that already has an X-token.

Finally, attacking! Well, first you must be next to their ship or in their port to attack them, and no, diagonals or obstructions–like islands–don’t count! Before you attack them, you can threaten them, demanding resources for free or for a major profit on your end. Here is an example; <i>Bob, I am going to attack you unless you give me three gold</i>! Bob can either give me the gold creating a treaty, or refuse. But let's say that I don’t threaten Bob. Bob now has the option to bribe me, giving me some resources to not attack. If I take this bribe, a treaty is created. Before we move onto actual attacking mechanics, if you trade with a player, take a bribe, or seceded in threatening, you cannot attack that play that turn. You are in a treaty, but treaties only last for that turn. Ok finally, when you want to attack someone, you both role a die. For this example, I have a ship with one cannon and Bob doesn’t. Bob rolls a three and I roll a two. I win because my cannon counts as an extra point, and ties always go to the attacker. Now let's say I was attacking his island, that had one skull, I would lose because for each skull on an island adds one point to their role. If you have zero lives left after an attack, your ship is destroyed and the other player gains a plunder point, unless stated otherwise.

One question that is probably burning in your mind right now is, what if I lose all my ships and islands? Am I out? No, no, you’re not! That is a great aspect of this game, no matter what, you can always get back on your feet! Here are the rules, first you can attempt to roll doubles, but if you fail then, you can still gain a ship by spending a plunder point card, buying one with resource cards like normal, spend five gold, disown an island removing your flag but gaining a ship, or wait till next turn! If you still have an island, you will place this ship on of your ports like normal with three lives and no upgrades. Now if you find yourself without a ship, island, or Plunder Point cards, you can pick one card of your choice from the face up pills each turn you still meet these requirements. If you manage to gain a ship but have no islands, spin the compasses to place your ship, if it lands on an island or on a ship pick one of the adjacent squares that is not obstructed nor is a diagonal to place the ship then roll and play as normal. See, you are never out, which is great when your family teams up to destroy you! And yes, this has happened to me!

Now what if you don’t have three players? Well, you can play with two, but with a few rule changes, firstly remove the two board tiles with merchant ports and remove the 13-18 boarder tiles to create a 2x2 board. This smaller board makes it harder for two players and removed trading with the bank. The other rules change is that you will only use two X-tokens, rather than three or four, also note that if you spin 13-18 re-spin so it lands on the board! Now just play as normal with these changes to play with just one other person.

Now, you can also play with teams too, with two teams of two, two teams of three, or three teams of two. Note that you will play to sixteen Plunder Points instead of ten when playing with teams, unless it is three teams of two, in which case you will play to fourteen Plunder Points. A few addition rule changes are teams must alternate turns to make things fair, so arrange the order as needed. You can strategize with your teammates, but you cannot command their fleet, only yours. You can also still trade with your teammate, as long as you follow normal trading rules, and neither of you gain more than once resource, so you can not give your teammate three gold for one rum, but you could for two rum. Never forget the teams, as if you make a treaty with one player, you also make a treaty with their teammate. Finally, if your teammate is in your port you can disown your island and gift it to them, just switch out the flags! Other than those modifications, play with all the normal rules and you can team up to create giant fleets of ships!!!

And that is Plunder; <i>A Pirate’s Life</i>, a game full of adventure, danger, and risk taking! From hunting for treasure to taking over native islands, your leaderships skills will be tested as you command your fleet for victory! Just never forget that pirates can never be trusted, not even your closest friends, win at all costs, SHOW NO MERCY!


---