---
category: "Speeches"
page_title: "Affirmative Debate Resolution"
layout: "paper"
title: "Affirmative Debate Resolution"
student: "Thomas and Silas"
class: "<a target='_blank' href='https://kepler.education/courses/28ca2a85-a1e4-489b-ad9b-e17592c84137'>Speech and Debate</a>, 1:30 pm EST"
instructor: "Dr. Karla Memmott, Instructor"
date_sub: "November 4, 2024"
citations: [
    "Scott Postma. “The Right Kind of Education.” Last modified July 7, 2021. <a href='https://scottpostma.net/2021/07/01/the-right-kind-of-education/' target='_blank'>https://scottpostma.net/2021/07/01/the-right-kind-of-education/</a>.",
]
file: "../../assets/files/pdf/Team_Platonistic_Minds_affirmative_debate_resolution.pdf"
---

<div id="notes">Students were asked to uphold the following Status Quo, using proper ethos, pathos, logos, and mythos. Student then had to present it against another team in traditional debate flow. Status Quo: <i>AI (Artificial Intelligence) essay compositions should be accepted as original, student-work products and graded accordingly.</i></div>

## First Affirmative

Greetings, Judge Memmott, I am Thomas, one of the affirmative speakers for today’s round. Artificial Intelligence is undeniably a marvel of modern science and technological advancement. However, as these programs become widely available for free, it is becoming a crutch for the students. Today, we stand by the resolution that AI-generated essays should not be accepted as a student's own, as it is dishonest, lacks effort, not original, and is considered plagiarism. While my opponents here may try to convince you that AI essay composition should be accepted as original student work, or at least in part, this is detrimental to not only the student, but also the education system, the culture, and the future of humanity.

Firstly, before we get into our arguments, we want to define some terms as well as crediting Dr. Postma—who is the CEO and President of Kepler Education, dedicating his career to education and lifelong learning, along with getting a Ph.D. in Humanities w/ concentration in Literature, and being on the Consortium of Classical Educators—for providing us with an interview.! The first definition, Artificial Intelligence or AI. AI is a computer algorithm that has been trained upon human creativity—text and images—to compose text or images in such a way that it appears human. This is the type of AI available today, not AGI, Artificial General Intelligence, which is Artificial Intelligence that is capable of self-awareness, being able to learn, understand, and apply knowledge like humans, AGI also does not need human input. Neither is it ASI, Artificial Superintelligence, which is advanced Artificial General Intelligence that is superior to that of man in every way imaginable. Second, plagiarism, which is to steal—or kidnap—and pass off the ideas or words of another as one's own without crediting the source, with or without their consent. Thirdly, original student work, which must be developed by the student, so that it accurately represents their authentic objective for the paper. Finally, an essay is a short composition of words, and phrases to create an original creative, informative, or persuasive narrative.

Secondly, when a student uses Artificial Intelligence to generate an essay, they are removing the effort they should put into an assignment. For instance, the time it would take. A student could spend a few hours writing their rough draft for a thousand-word essay, or spend five-ten minutes using AI to generate one. We are not only condemning the sole use of AI to generate an essay, but also its use in revisions, as a student should show that they have adequate ability to complete their assignments out of their own being. Using AI to write or revise is as dishonest as paying someone to do it for you. To prove this my associate and I did a test, creating 5 prompts to give to AI, and to humans. While AI was faster by an overwhelming margin, it was less creative, less realistic, and had a hard time with reasoning. While AI may be able to give you a quick response that appears human and may fit the parameters of the assignment, it is going to have less thought, and blood, sweat, and tears poorer upon it. The fact of the matter is, AI takes the effort away, it removes the skill, the knowledge, and the practice needed to create a well-rounded essay. AI also adheres to style, grammar, and spelling in a much greater capacity than say an average student or teacher could. While AI may seam like a useful tool, it is a crutch, a prop, and a shortcut.

Thirdly, AI essay generation is not original student work. As stated above, for an essay to be original student work, it must be developed by the student, that accurately represents their authentic objective for the paper. Or as Dr. Postma said in an interview, students original work is: “Clear thinking that the student produces on their own, that manifestation of a student’s thought put into symbols that can be held out in front of us to be thought about, contemplated, and discussed.” For a student to create a prompt and then feed it to AI, then copy the output, and pass it along as original work. This would also include AI revisions or a research aid, as it takes away from the student original thought. While our opponents may try to prove that AI generation is in fact random, and hence original, AI generation is not original, it is an estimated prediction, as my associate will show you.

Finally, using AI is detrimental to the student, the education system, the culture, and the future of humanity. Using AI for essay composition or revisions is not beneficial to the skill of the student, as Dr. Postma said: “education is not job training. It is the cultivation of wisdom and the preparation of the individual to be virtuous through the long task of transferring the knowledge, traditions, and mores of one generation to the next.”<sup>1</sup> Using AI is not only dishonest, as most colleges and schools forbid it, but also causes harm to the student. We included the education system, culture, and the future of humanity because a place where students use AI to do their work, over doing the work for themselves creates weakness, it creates a generation willing to take shortcuts no matter the cost. As G. Michael Hopf said in his book <i>Those Who Remain</i>: “Hard times create strong men, strong men create good times, good times create weak men, and weak men create hard times.” AI is creating a weak generation, who see shortcuts as a means to an end, ignoring the detrimental downsides. If students grow up using AI as a shortcut, this will result in a generation that cannot cultivate wisdom and transfer it to the next generation.  AI is a tool that can be helpful, but as soon as it takes away from human thought, it will result in a void of meaninglessness. Therefore, AI essay compositions should not be accepted as student original work, as it is dishonest, it removes the requirement of skill and practice from the student, and it is no longer the student's original work.

## Second Affirmative

As my associate stated previously, we should retain the current status quo that AI essay compositions should not be accepted as student original student work. This is important because AI is detrimental to the students' skill, knowledge, and determination to be virtuous and honest. To restate a key factor in this, using AI to compose an essay from a prompt to the finished work, the student is spending a fraction of the time on their assignment. You have to remember that essays of this manner are a test of the students' knowledge, and learning in that class. When a student uses AI, it could be considered cheating, especially when the essay is being evaluated upon the students' comprehension of the course materials or ability to create their own opinions. 

As stated before, when a student uses AI, it is not their work, not their words, and this is not only dishonest, but also is very visible to teachers. I want to share a story that Dr. Postma shared with us in our interview: “I’ll give you an example, one time there was a student in my class, and keep in mind the teacher is actually reading the student's work and engaging with the student for a couple of years, and you kind of get to know their writing style. And this particular student was writing and about halfway through the tone or the tenor of the essay changed. It still kind of finished it out but it used vocabulary that the student never would have used, it framed it in a way that student never had before. So when I confronted the student and asked whether or not this was their original work, and they said ‘I almost finished it but I wasn’t quite there so I put it in ChatGPT and that finished it, so I could pass it off.’” Now, not every student will be caught and this is a very specific example, but regardless it shows that AI writing does not reflect you, your personality, your ingenuity, your ideas, or your style in the same way that you could by writing it yourself. Putting in the work is a discipline that you must learn, taking the time to procure. 

Another reason that the status quo should be kept is that AI text generation is technically plagiarism, and when you then pass it off as your own work, you are plagiarizing. We say this because of how AI generates text, or rather predicts it, AI’s like ChatGPT-3.5 use a LLM—Large Language Module—to predict what is most likely to come next. It does this by first taking the prompt and converting the text to tokens, which are easier for the AI to understand, it then looks at its 175 BILLION parameters in its neural network—which is similar to a human brain—to predict what is most likely to come next, it repeats this for each word until it has a completed output. This also results in the AI in responding with a very similar or same voice in every response like a human would, you can’t simply tell an AI to “write more human.” You must also note that AI was trained upon large sections of the internet, or other human writings in which the developers didn’t get permission to use, hence meaning AI essay composition is plagiarizing people. We say plagiarizing because AI predicts what should come next by identifying trends and schemes within the sample data—the data it is given during training—this sometimes leads to direct or partial quoting without citations.  Now, this does not mean that anyone who reads anything then writes about it is plagiarizing, as that is how us as humans learn, but unlike humans, as stated before, AI uses patterns in sample data to predict and pick the next word. Humans learn how each word works and how sentences should be structured, our brains then create connections between words and pick and place them until it creates a sentence, like my associate and I did writing this debate. 

Next, as Christians we should use this gift given to use by God, the gift of creativeness and ability to create beautiful works. The Bible was written by men, great poetry and epics throughout history, were written by men, not AI. No AI will ever be able to surpass human ingenuity, not even Artificial Superintelligence. Using AI is lazy, leading to an empty void, as it says in Proverbs 13:4 “The soul of the sluggard craves and gets nothing, while the soul of the diligent is richly supplied.” Those who put in the effort, and time to prosper in skill and knowledge will be richly gifted, but those who are sluggards will get nothing. We are to take dominion over our work, and using a tool like AI to do the work for us, removes this element.

Finally, writing is an art, as Dr. Postma said: “Good writing is clear thinking made visible.” As rhetoric is the art of persuasive speaking and writing, writing is the art of making your thoughts visible to the eye. Or as The American Heritage Dictionary says, art is: “the conscious use of the imagination in the production of objects intended to be contemplated or appreciated as beautiful, as in the arrangement of forms, sounds, or words” So I beg the question, can AI work be art? Should AI image generation be considered “art”? AI is not conscious, at least not yet, hence meaning AI generation of anything cannot be art, as AI cannot be an artist in its current state. Art is something we must protect, and allowing students to use AI freely will rob us of this, it will result in the loss of some much creativity. Thus, AI essay composition should not be accepted as student Original work, as it is dishonest, removes the skill and effort, it is not original work of the student, it removes the art from writing, and as Christians we need to take dominion of our works, not throw it away to some crutch or cheat.

## Rebuttal
We intend to maintain the status quo because changing it would promote laziness, dishonesty, and deterioration in our writing. Because education is the system by which all of us are developed, we must be careful to only promote and instill the best in our students. Allowing laziness and dishonesty will translate not only into the work-place, but into every other area of a student’s life. As for deterioration of writing, it is important to preserve that which has been put in our charge, and one of these is the art form of writing. We urge you not to allow the technological advancements of today to compromise the Lord’s creation tomorrow.


---