src/milestone.md, before:

---
layout: "milestone.njk"
page_title: "Milestones"
title: "Silas's Milestone Tracker"
milestones: [
  ["2007.", "February", 22, "The Beginning", "The day I was born – The start of my journey!", "right"],
  ["2007!", "June", "", "First Plane Ride", "I took my first plane ride to Arizona, marking a memorable adventure as a baby.", "left"],
  ["2007!", "July", "", "Started Crawling", "I started crawling, marking the first of many developmental milestones in my early childhood.", "right"],
  ["2007.", "October", "", "First Surgery", "I underwent surgery for a genetic defect in my left foot, specifically isolated gigantism in my second toe. This caused my second toe to be about three times larger than my first toe. Following the doctor's advice, my parents had it surgically removed when I was about nine months old.", "left"],
  ["2007.", "December", "", "Started Walking", "I took my first steps, entering a new stage of independence and movement.", "right"],
  ["2008!", "February", 22, "Birthday", "My 1st Birthday – A memorable start to life!", "left"],
  ["2009!", "February", 22, "Birthday", "My 2nd Birthday – Full of joy and new milestones!", "right"],
  ["2010.", "February", 22, "Birthday", "My 3rd Birthday – Embracing the world with curiosity!", "left"],
  ["2010", "March", "", "First Pet", "I got my first pet – chickens! It was the beginning of my love for animals and caring for them.", "right"],
  ["2011.", "February", 22, "Birthday", "My 4th Birthday – A year full of firsts!", "left"],
  ["2012!", "February", 22, "Birthday", "My 5th Birthday – Celebrating growth and new adventures!", "right"],
  ["2013!", "February", 22, "Birthday", "My 6th Birthday – A big year of learning and fun!", "left"],
  ["2014.", "February", 22, "Birthday", "My 7th Birthday – Full of excitement and dreams!", "right"],
  ["2015!", "February", 22, "Birthday", "My 8th Birthday – Celebrating with family and friends!", "left"],
  ["2016!", "February", 22, "Birthday", "My 9th Birthday – Full of hope and possibilities!", "right"],
  ["2017!", "February", 22, "Birthday", "My 10th Birthday – Marking a decade of experiences!", "left"],
  ["2017!", "March", "", "Kennedy Space Center", "My dad took me to visit the Kennedy Space Center in Florida, exploring the wonders of space and the history of NASA.", "right"],
  ["2017", "April", 30, "First Public Speaking", "I was given the opportunity to give the call to worship in front of the entire congregation at Christ Central Church in Durham, a big step in my public speaking journey.", "left"],
  ["2017.", "June", "", "DC", "Went to Washington DC for the first time, seeing the nation's capital and learning about American history, with my grandparents!", "right"],
  ["2018!", "August", "", "6th Grade Starts", "I began my journey at Heritage Leadership Academy, ready for the challenges ahead.", "left"],
  ["2019!", "February", 22, "Birthday", "My 12th Birthday – Reflecting on my childhood and looking ahead!", "right"],
  ["2019!", "May", "", "6th Grade Ends", "I completed my 6th grade year, learning a lot and growing in many ways.", "left"],
  ["2019.", "August", "", "7th Grade Starts", "7th grade marked another year of learning and building new friendships.", "right"],
  ["2020.", "February", 22, "Birthday", "My 13th Birthday – A time to reflect on everything so far and look toward the future!", "left"],
  ["2020!", "May", "", "7th Grade Ends", "My 7th grade year wrapped up, bringing me new knowledge and challenges.", "right"],
  ["2020.", "August", "", "8th Grade Starts", "8th grade was a year of personal growth and preparing for high school.", "left"],
  ["2021", "February", 22, "Birthday", "My 14th Birthday – Another year older, wiser, and ready for new experiences!", "right"],
  ["2021.", "May", "", "8th Grade Ends", "Finishing my 8th grade year, I was ready for the next step towards high school.", "left"],
  ["2021.", "August", "", "9th Grade Starts", "Entering high school, I joined Kepler Education to pursue my diploma track studies.", "right"],
  ["2022!", "February", 22, "Birthday", "My 15th Birthday – Stepping into another year of learning and experiences!", "left"],
  ["2022.", "May", "", "9th Grade Ends", "My freshman year at Kepler Education was completed, setting the foundation for the rest of high school.", "right"],
  ["2022.", "August", "", "10th Grade Starts", "I began my sophomore year, continuing my diploma track journey with more dedication.", "left"],
  ["2022.", "October", 18, "Get Permit", "I earned my driving permit, marking an important step toward independence. Only sixty hours of driving in a 15 passenger van stopping me from getting my Level 2 License!", "right"],
  ["2023.", "February", 22, "Birthday", "My 16th Birthday – A milestone year of reflection and growth!", "left"],
  ["2023.", "May", "", "10th Grade Ends", "I finished my 10th grade year with determination, having faced many challenges.", "right"],
  ["2023.", "May", "", "Attended the Kepler Lamb Roast", "Thanks to my grandparents, for taking me out to the Kepler Lamb Roast, where I got to meet teachers, mentors, and fellow students in person for the first time! I made some memories I will never forget", "left"],
  ["2023", "July", 26, "Second Surgery", "My doctor advised us to have a second surgery to realign my first and second (really third) toes on my left foot to 'remove the pain and allow me to walk normally.' The plan was to break both my first and third toes to realign them and then use a wedge to push my second toe down. However, during surgery, the surgeon decided to use two plates—one on each toe—and eight screws instead. Unfortunately, my surgeon did not perform the procedure properly, which resulted in me being unable to walk for over sixteen weeks. When we consulted him, he said that physical therapy would not help, and I would just have to deal with the pain for the rest of my life. As far as I know, the toes never fully healed; the last time I checked, both toes were still broken, and it has been almost two years since the surgery. In November of 2023, I started physical therapy—despite my doctor’s recommendation—at the <a target='_blank' href='https://originalstrengthinstitute.com'>Original Strength Institute in Fuquay-Varina</a> with Dr. Kurt Brooke. Within a couple of months, I was walking again, and in just over a year, I was back to normal, running, walking, and more. <a target='_blank' href='https://originalstrengthinstitute.com/from-pain-to-progress-silas-schlaxs-incredible-recovery-story/'>Read my full story here</a>, just note that I started at 16 not 18!", "right"],
  ["2023.", "August", "", "11th Grade Starts", "My junior year at Kepler Education began, bringing more responsibility and preparation for the future.", "left"],
  ["2024.", "February", 22, "Birthday", "My 17th Birthday – Another year of personal and academic growth!", "right"],
  ["2024!", "January", 5, "Get Level 2 License", "I got my Level 2 driver's license, giving me more freedom to drive without supervision.", "left"],
  ["2024!", "April", 10, "First Job", "I got a job at <a target='_blank' href='https://www.bulkogi.com'>Bulkogi</a> as a line cook, learning the ins and outs of the restaurant industry and gaining valuable work experience.", "right"],
  ["2024.", "July", 8, "Get Full License", "I earned my full driver's license, achieving the final step of becoming a fully independent driver.", "left"],
  ["2024!", "May", "", "11th Grade Ends", "I finished my 11th grade year, now looking forward to my senior year.", "right"],
  ["2024.", "August", "", "12th Grade Starts", "I began my final year of high school, focused on completing my diploma requirements.", "left"],
  ["2025!", "February", 22, "Birthday", "My 18th Birthday – A major milestone as I continue my educational journey!", "right"],
  ["2025", "May", 23, "End of the Year Festival Graduation", "Celebrating the end of the year and my graduation at the festival, surrounded by classmates, teachers, and mentors.", "left"],
  ["2025", "June", 7, "Baccalaureate (Graduation)", "My final graduation day! A significant moment of achievement, reflecting on years of hard work and preparing for the next chapter.", "right"]
]
---

Commit message:

Updated last 3 milestones to have more details

src/milestone.md, after:

---
layout: "milestone.njk"
page_title: "Milestones"
title: "Silas's Milestone Tracker"
milestones: [
  ["2007.", "February", 22, "The Beginning", "The day I was born – The start of my journey!", "right"],
  ["2007!", "June", "", "First Plane Ride", "I took my first plane ride to Arizona, marking a memorable adventure as a baby.", "left"],
  ["2007!", "July", "", "Started Crawling", "I started crawling, marking the first of many developmental milestones in my early childhood.", "right"],
  ["2007.", "October", "", "First Surgery", "I underwent surgery for a genetic defect in my left foot, specifically isolated gigantism in my second toe. This caused my second toe to be about three times larger than my first toe. Following the doctor's advice, my parents had it surgically removed when I was about nine months old.", "left"],
  ["2007.", "December", "", "Started Walking", "I took my first steps, entering a new stage of independence and movement.", "right"],
  ["2008!", "February", 22, "Birthday", "My 1st Birthday – A memorable start to life!", "left"],
  ["2009!", "February", 22, "Birthday", "My 2nd Birthday – Full of joy and new milestones!", "right"],
  ["2010.", "February", 22, "Birthday", "My 3rd Birthday – Embracing the world with curiosity!", "left"],
  ["2010", "March", "", "First Pet", "I got my first pet – chickens! It was the beginning of my love for animals and caring for them.", "right"],
  ["2011.", "February", 22, "Birthday", "My 4th Birthday – A year full of firsts!", "left"],
  ["2012!", "February", 22, "Birthday", "My 5th Birthday – Celebrating growth and new adventures!", "right"],
  ["2013!", "February", 22, "Birthday", "My 6th Birthday – A big year of learning and fun!", "left"],
  ["2014.", "February", 22, "Birthday", "My 7th Birthday – Full of excitement and dreams!", "right"],
  ["2015!", "February", 22, "Birthday", "My 8th Birthday – Celebrating with family and friends!", "left"],
  ["2016!", "February", 22, "Birthday", "My 9th Birthday – Full of hope and possibilities!", "right"],
  ["2017!", "February", 22, "Birthday", "My 10th Birthday – Marking a decade of experiences!", "left"],
  ["2017!", "March", "", "Kennedy Space Center", "My dad took me to visit the Kennedy Space Center in Florida, exploring the wonders of space and the history of NASA.", "right"],
  ["2017", "April", 30, "First Public Speaking", "I was given the opportunity to give the call to worship in front of the entire congregation at Christ Central Church in Durham, a big step in my public speaking journey.", "left"],
  ["2017.", "June", "", "DC", "Went to Washington DC for the first time, seeing the nation's capital and learning about American history, with my grandparents!", "right"],
  ["2018!", "August", "", "6th Grade Starts", "I began my journey at Heritage Leadership Academy, ready for the challenges ahead.", "left"],
  ["2019!", "February", 22, "Birthday", "My 12th Birthday – Reflecting on my childhood and looking ahead!", "right"],
  ["2019!", "May", "", "6th Grade Ends", "I completed my 6th grade year, learning a lot and growing in many ways.", "left"],
  ["2019.", "August", "", "7th Grade Starts", "7th grade marked another year of learning and building new friendships.", "right"],
  ["2020.", "February", 22, "Birthday", "My 13th Birthday – A time to reflect on everything so far and look toward the future!", "left"],
  ["2020!", "May", "", "7th Grade Ends", "My 7th grade year wrapped up, bringing me new knowledge and challenges.", "right"],
  ["2020.", "August", "", "8th Grade Starts", "8th grade was a year of personal growth and preparing for high school.", "left"],
  ["2021", "February", 22, "Birthday", "My 14th Birthday – Another year older, wiser, and ready for new experiences!", "right"],
  ["2021.", "May", "", "8th Grade Ends", "Finishing my 8th grade year, I was ready for the next step towards high school.", "left"],
  ["2021.", "August", "", "9th Grade Starts", "Entering high school, I joined Kepler Education to pursue my diploma track studies.", "right"],
  ["2022!", "February", 22, "Birthday", "My 15th Birthday – Stepping into another year of learning and experiences!", "left"],
  ["2022.", "May", "", "9th Grade Ends", "My freshman year at Kepler Education was completed, setting the foundation for the rest of high school.", "right"],
  ["2022.", "August", "", "10th Grade Starts", "I began my sophomore year, continuing my diploma track journey with more dedication.", "left"],
  ["2022.", "October", 18, "Get Permit", "I earned my driving permit, marking an important step toward independence. Only sixty hours of driving in a 15 passenger van stopping me from getting my Level 2 License!", "right"],
  ["2023.", "February", 22, "Birthday", "My 16th Birthday – A milestone year of reflection and growth!", "left"],
  ["2023.", "May", "", "10th Grade Ends", "I finished my 10th grade year with determination, having faced many challenges.", "right"],
  ["2023.", "May", "", "Attended the Kepler Lamb Roast", "Thanks to my grandparents, for taking me out to the Kepler Lamb Roast, where I got to meet teachers, mentors, and fellow students in person for the first time! I made some memories I will never forget", "left"],
  ["2023", "July", 26, "Second Surgery", "My doctor advised us to have a second surgery to realign my first and second (really third) toes on my left foot to 'remove the pain and allow me to walk normally.' The plan was to break both my first and third toes to realign them and then use a wedge to push my second toe down. However, during surgery, the surgeon decided to use two plates—one on each toe—and eight screws instead. Unfortunately, my surgeon did not perform the procedure properly, which resulted in me being unable to walk for over sixteen weeks. When we consulted him, he said that physical therapy would not help, and I would just have to deal with the pain for the rest of my life. As far as I know, the toes never fully healed; the last time I checked, both toes were still broken, and it has been almost two years since the surgery. In November of 2023, I started physical therapy—despite my doctor’s recommendation—at the <a target='_blank' href='https://originalstrengthinstitute.com'>Original Strength Institute in Fuquay-Varina</a> with Dr. Kurt Brooke. Within a couple of months, I was walking again, and in just over a year, I was back to normal, running, walking, and more. <a target='_blank' href='https://originalstrengthinstitute.com/from-pain-to-progress-silas-schlaxs-incredible-recovery-story/'>Read my full story here</a>, just note that I started at 16 not 18!", "right"],
  ["2023.", "August", "", "11th Grade Starts", "My junior year at Kepler Education began, bringing more responsibility and preparation for the future.", "left"],
  ["2024.", "February", 22, "Birthday", "My 17th Birthday – Another year of personal and academic growth!", "right"],
  ["2024!", "January", 5, "Get Level 2 License", "I got my Level 2 driver's license, giving me more freedom to drive without supervision.", "left"],
  ["2024!", "April", 10, "First Job", "I got a job at <a target='_blank' href='https://www.bulkogi.com'>Bulkogi</a> as a line cook, learning the ins and outs of the restaurant industry and gaining valuable work experience.", "right"],
  ["2024.", "July", 8, "Get Full License", "I earned my full driver's license, achieving the final step of becoming a fully independent driver.", "left"],
  ["2024!", "May", "", "11th Grade Ends", "I finished my 11th grade year, now looking forward to my senior year.", "right"],
  ["2024.", "August", "", "12th Grade Starts", "I began my final year of high school, focused on completing my diploma requirements.", "left"],
  ["2025!", "February", 22, "Birthday", "My 18th Birthday – A major milestone as I continue on my journey. For my 'last' birthday as a 'child,' I was able to celebrate by hosting a murder mystery party with some of my friends. This was a full formal event, all of us dressing up to fit the theme of the 1920s—with a twist... MURDER! Among us was one murderer, and we had to figure out who it was before the night ended. To our delight, we succeeded and found the murderer! It was a night of mystery, laughter, and memories that made turning eighteen truly unforgettable.", "right"],
  ["2025", "May", 23, "End of the Year Festival Graduation", "Celebrating the end of the year and my graduation at the festival, surrounded by classmates, teachers, and mentors. I have spent all of my high school years at Kepler, learning, growing, and building my perspective on the world. I am truly grateful to Kepler for existing and for the opportunity to experience a genuine Classical Christian Education. The festival was not just a graduation, but a celebration of community and shared purpose. With food, music, and fellowship, it marked the closing of one chapter and the joyful anticipation of what is to come.", "left"],
  ["2025", "June", 7, "Baccalaureate (Graduation)", "My final graduation day! A significant moment of achievement, reflecting on years of hard work and preparing for the next chapter. From officially graduating from my homeschool to standing beside friends, family, mentors, and others who have supported me, this was a powerful moment of transition. The ceremony was both personal and meaningful, celebrating not only academic accomplishment but the relationships and lessons that shaped who I am. This day marked the formal end of my school years—and the beginning of whatever comes next.", "right"]
]
---
